To finish this module,
we're going to go back to something
that we discussed in the introduction.
This has to do with the idea of creating
prediction models using average values.
It seems reasonable to believe that
if we use the average value for
an uncertain input, we should get
the average value for an output.
While this might be true in some cases,
it is not universally true for all models.
This phenomenon is known
as the Flaw of Averages.
Let's examine this idea on
a very well-known situation
called the news vendor problem.
The news vendor problem applies to
many practical situations where
a one time purchase decision must be
made in the face of uncertain demand.
Department store managers must
make purchasing decisions for
seasonal items well in advance of
the beginning of the the season.
For example, ski jackets
are typically ordered in the summer.
The name of the problem comes from the
scenario where a news vendor needs to make
a decision about the number of newspapers
to purchase to sell the next day.
If she doesn't know enough,
then there is an opportunity cost, and
if she orders too many, then the leftover
papers go to the recycling bin.
The input of a news vendor
model consists of demand,
selling price, cost and salvage value.
The quantity to purchase is a decision and
the output is the total profit.
In this model, the selling price
is larger than the cost and
the cost is larger than the salvage value.
Let's take a look at the news
vendor model in Excel.
Locate and
open the Excel file News Vendor.
This workbook contains two models for
a hypothetical ski apparel store that must
order ski jackets for the next season.
The jackets cost $54 and
can be sold for $145.
The salvage value of a jacket is $45.
The historical average
demand is 80 jackets.
Before examining the model
in the workbook,
let's turn on the interactive
simulation of the ASP.
Click on
the Analytic Solver Platform tab and
then click on the simulate ball
in the Solve Action group.
Let's take a look at
the average volume model.
Cell B10 contains a decision on
the number of jackets to purchase..
This cell is colored yellow to
indicate that is a decision.
In this case we are saying that
the manager is going to purchase
the historical average of 80 jackets.
The model assumes that the demand is going
to be the historical average demand.
So there is an 80 in cell B11.
This means that the model assumes
that all the jackets that
were purchased will be sold and
there will be no surplus.
The total revenue is
calculated in cell B14.
The cost is in B15, and the profit in B16.
Since the model doesn't consider
any of the uncertainty,
the average profit in cell B17 is
the same as the profit in cell B16.
The estimated profit is $7,280.
Now, let's take a look
at the simulation model.
We're going to assume the store
would purchase the historical
average of 80 jackets.
The demand value in cell E11 is in green,
the color that we have been using to
indicate that this is a uncertain value.
If we double click on this cell, we can
see that we are making an assumption that
the demand follows a Poisson distribution
with an average of 80 jackets.
The rest of the formulas
to calculate the profit
are the same as in
the average value model.
The profit is the simulation output.
So cell E16 includes
the psi output function.
The average profit is calculated
using the PsiMean function.
The difference between
the average model and
the simulation model is that we have
added uncertainty in the demand.
The uncertainty was modeled
using a Poisson distribution.
If the assumption is correct that
the demand follows a Poisson distribution,
which could be verified by analyzing
historical data, then the simulation
model shows that the average value model
is over-estimating the expected profit.
This tells us that using
an average value for
an uncertain input,
the demand in this case,
does not necessarily result in the correct
estimate for the average output value.
What is happening here is that every
time the demand is larger than 80,
the profit it stays at $7,280.
However, when the demand is less than 80,
the profit drops because there
will be some loss associated with
selling jackets at their salvage value.
The average value model is
not able to capture this.
To conclude, I hope that I
have been able to convince you
of the benefits of simulation
as a predictive analytics tool
that enables you to incorporate
uncertainty in decision making models.
In this example,
we show how average values might
result in misleading information.
But this is just one of several important
insights produced by various types
of analysis that we have
discussed throughout this module.